which has greater appeal, an effective counselor or loving shepherd.
If you're to be effective brothers and sisters in strengthening the organization and building up the brotherhood,
it's a good subject to consider and it includes you sisters too.
A counselor can be defined as one who gives advice. Now the world has a lot of counselors.
They've got marriage counselors and financial counselors and bereavement counselors and all kinds of counselors.
And you'll find that their counsel varies according to their experience in education.
A hit the fell is a biblical example of a counselor.
And the Bible says what he advised was considered as the word of the true God.
Today, a person might feel that he is a good counselor and he may freely offer advice, some of which may or may not be accepted.
Maybe a solution oriented husband counsels his emotionally distraught wife to just quit worry.
Or well versed elder quickly reads a Bible text and he advises an extreme and anxiety filled publisher to just get over it.
How effective is such counsel?
There's a saying people don't care how much you know until they know how much you care.
Counsel is more effective when the counselor is also a shepherd.
A shepherd is one who comforts nourishes listens and does not ignore the emotional needs of the distraught one.
Jehovah gives counsel or advice, but he always does more.
You see, he also shepherds.
When he counsels, he tends to the person's emotional needs and he provides a needed follow-up.
Consider how he dealt with an emotionally depressed prophet by the name of Elijah.
I'm turning to First Kings 19 and we're going to consider just briefly the interaction he had with Elijah.
And you will recall that he was driven by fear. Elijah was driven by fear of Jezebel.
Elijah fled southward for 95 miles to Bersheba.
And then he walked for about another 200 miles to Mount Hora.
But now notice in verse 5 it says then he that is Elijah lay down and fell asleep under the broom tree.
But suddenly an angel touched him and said to him, get up and eat.
When he looked, there his head was around loaf on heated stones and a jug of water.
He ate and drank and laid down again.
Later the angel of Jehovah came back a second time and touched him and said, get up and eat.
For the journey will be too much for you.
So he got up and ate a drink and knew the strength of that nourishment.
He went on for 40 days and 40 nights until he reached Hora, the mountain of the true God.
You notice the angel awakened Elijah, ministered to him and Elijah went back to sleep like depressed ones often do.
Maybe the angel waited all night and the king touched Elijah again and then gave him more nourishment.
Nourishment such that would take him 40 days and 40 nights on his journey to Mount Hora.
Now here's a question you have to ask yourself.
Do you think that that angel agreed with the way Elijah was acting?
Do you think the angel might have wanted to give a little counsel and tell Elijah, look Elijah, just get over it.
Just trust God and get back to your assignment.
But he didn't.
Do you think Jehovah knew how Elijah was thinking?
Do you think he agreed with it?
No, definitely not.
The council may have handled it one way, but Jehovah, the God of all comfort, would first address Elijah's emotional needs.
So when Elijah finally entered the cave at Mount Hora, you remember what Jehovah did?
In a calm low voice, gentle voice, he said Elijah, what is your business here?
And that was a warm invitation for Elijah to express himself.
Just talk to me, you see.
And so Elijah did, look at verse 10.
And see, what was it Elijah said?
He said, I have been absolutely zealous for Jehovah the God of armies, for the people of Israel forsaken your covenant.
So Elijah felt like his work was in vain.
And then he said, I'm the only one left.
Elijah felt alone.
And he said, there are seeking to take me away.
Take my life away.
So Elijah was also afraid.
Would you overheard what he said?
And he addressed all of Elijah's concern.
And then afterwards, he gave Elijah the encouragement that would allow him to continue on in Jehovah's service with boldness.
So how can we learn from this brief experience?
Well, we learn that Jehovah validated the man's emotions without agreeing with his thinking.
And we also learn that it's often not necessary to offer a quick solution,
simply allowing a person to express themselves without feeling judged,
can bring tremendous relief.
In fact, friends, and being heard is so close to being loved that for the average person, it's indistinguishable.
Like Jehovah, we'll be more effective if we're patient shepherds that listen and give thoughtful consideration to the feelings of those that we're seeking to help.
So here are four takeaway points.
Number one, be a listener, not a lecturer, show empathy.
And remember, empathy is seeing with the eyes of another, hearing with the ears of another, and feeling with a heart of another.
It's easy, friends, for imperfect humans to take themselves too seriously, especially when they're given a position of responsibility.
So at times, it may even be best to refrain from offering counsel too soon, because that creates an air of superiority.
Conversely, a willingness to hear even wild talk from another will reveal the depth of our own humility.
Point number two, validate people's emotions.
And don't just dismiss them, feelings are real, so know the difference between validating and invalidating statements.
I can see why you would feel that way. That must be really hard.
You see, when we listen with empathy, what we're really saying is, you matter to me, that you're important, and I care how you feel.
Additionally, when you validate the other person, they become significantly more likely to listen to advice or counsel later.
Remember, there is a difference between, and by the way, let me just say this, that counsel is not necessarily good just because it's accurate.
Frankly, how you give it and when you give it is important.
So try to remember that, just because it's accurate doesn't make it good.
And there's a difference too between validating and devastating.
You know, you're too sensitive. What's the big deal? I don't want to hear it.
I don't have time for this. You need to work on your spirituality.
Now, although we may not mean it, this can translate into, you're not important.
Your feelings are important. And frankly, I don't really care. Point number three, acknowledge the vulnerability.
Sharing personal thoughts and emotions can be difficult, uncomfortable, and even scary.
But I think that we're encouraged to develop fellow feeling.
And finally point number four, offering counsel is entirely optional.
How many of us brothers have been on a shepherd and call, and we've said virtually nothing.
Then the publisher, the brother's sister afterward says, you know what? That's the best shepherd I've ever had.
So what some may need is not some solution for the problem, but simply to talk to a good listener.
Someone who will not tell them how they're supposed to feel, but will listen without being judgmental.
Saying his friends, time is life. If we won't give a brother our time, you really think we would give our life for him.
So when we show favor to the lonely one by giving him time and attention, we are in fact lending to Jehovah.
And the Bible says that he will repay us in our time of need.
So we've counsel and shepherding together and you'll be treasured by all those around you and most of all by Jehovah God and Jesus Christ.